contents/dataframes_performance.md, before:

## Performance {#sec:df_performance}

So far, we haven't thought about making our `DataFrames.jl` code **fast**.
Like everything in Julia, `DataFrames.jl` can be really fast.
In this section, we will give some performance tips and tricks.

### In-place operations {#sec:df_performance_inplace}

Like we explained in @sec:function_bang, functions that end with a bang `!` are a common pattern to denote functions that modify one or more of their arguments.
In the context of high performance Julia code, this *means* that **functions with `!` will just change in-place the objects that we have supplied as arguments.

Almost all the `DataFrames.jl` functions that we've seen have a \"`!` twin\".
For example, `filter` has an _in-place_ `filter!`, `select` has `select!`, `subset` has `subset!`, and so on.
Notice that these functions **do not** return a new `DataFrame`, but instead they **update** the `DataFrame` that they act upon.
Additionally, there are some functions that do not have a `!` counterpart.
For example, all the `join`s, for technical reasons, *cannot* be done in-place.
Thus, we don't have any `join!` functions in `DataFrames.jl`.

If you want the highest speed and performance in your code, you should definitely use the `!` functions instead of regular `DataFrames.jl` functions.

Let's go back to the example of the `select` function in the beginning of @sec:select.
Here is the responses `DataFrame`:

```jl
sco("responses()"; process=without_caption_label)
```

Now, let's perform the selection with the `select` function, like we did before:

```jl
s = """
    # allocating function # hide
    select(responses(), :id, :q1)
    """
sco(s, process=without_caption_label)
```

And here is the _in-place_ function:

```jl
s = """
    # non allocarting function # hide
    select!(responses(), :id, :q1)
    """
sco(s; process=without_caption_label)
```

The `@allocated` macro tells us how much memory was allocated.
In other words, **how much new information the computer had to store in its memory while running the code**.
Let's see how they will perform:

```jl
s = """
    # allocation # hide
    df = responses()
    @allocated select(df, :id, :q1)
    """
sco(s; process=string, post=plainblock)
```

```jl
s = """
    # non allocation # hide
    df = responses()
    @allocated select!(df, :id, :q1)
    """
sco(s; process=string, post=plainblock)
```

As we can see, `select!` allocates less than `select`.
So, it should be faster, while consuming less memory.

### Copying vs Not Copying Columns {#sec:df_performance_df_copy}

There are **two ways to access a DataFrame column**.
They differ in how they are accessed: one creates a "view" to the column without copying and the other creates a whole new column by copying the original column.

The first way uses the regular dot `.` operator followed by the column name, like in `df.col`.
This kind of access **does not copy** the column `col`.
Instead `df.col` creates a "view" which is a link to the original column without performing any allocation.
Additionally, the syntax `df.col` is the same as `df[!, :col]` with the bang `!` as the row selector.

The second way to access a `DataFrame` column is the `df[:, :col]` with the colon `:` as the row selector.
This kind of access **does copy** the column `col`, so beware that it may produce unwanted allocations.

As before, let's try out these two ways to access a column in the responses `DataFrame`:

```jl
s = """
    # allocation # hide
    df = responses()
    @allocated col = df[:, :id]
    """
sco(s; process=string, post=plainblock)
```


```jl
s = """
    # non allocation # hide
    df = responses()
    @allocated col = df[!, :id]
    """
sco(s; process=string, post=plainblock)
```

When we access a column without copying it we are making zero allocations and our code should be faster.
So, if you don't need a copy, always access your `DataFrame`s columns with `df.col` or `df[!, :col]` instead of `df[:, :col]`.

### CSV.read versus CSV.File {#sec:df_performance_csv_read_file}

If you take a look at the help output for `CSV.read`, you will see that there is a convenience function identical to the function called `CSV.File` with the same keyword arguments.
Both `CSV.read` and `CSV.File` will read the contents of a CSV file, but they differ in the default behavior.
**`CSV.read`, by default, will not make copies** of the incoming data.
Instead, `CSV.read` will pass all the data to the second argument (known as the "sink").

So, something like this:

```julia
df = CSV.read("file.csv", DataFrame)
```

will pass all the incoming data from `file.csv` to the `DataFrame` sink, thus returning a `DataFrame` type that we store in the `df` variable.

For the case of **`CSV.File`, the default behavior is the opposite: it will make copies of every column contained in the CSV file**.
Also, the syntax is slightly different.
We need to wrap anything that `CSV.File` returns in a `DataFrame` constructor function:

```julia
df = DataFrame(CSV.File("file.csv"))
```

Or, with the pipe `|>` operator:

```julia
df = CSV.File("file.csv") |> DataFrame
```

Like we said, `CSV.File` will make copies of each column in the underlying CSV file.
Ultimately, if you want the most performance, you would definitely use `CSV.read` instead of `CSV.File`.
That's why we only covered `CSV.read` in @sec:csv.

### CSV.jl Multiple Files {#sec:df_performance_csv_multiple}

Now let's turn our attention to the `CSV.jl`.
Specifically, the case when we have multiple CSV files to read into a single `DataFrame`.
Since version 0.9 of `CSV.jl` we can provide a vector of strings representing filenames.
Before, we needed to perform some sort of multiple file reading and then concatenate vertically the results into a single `DataFrame`.
To exemplify, the code below reads from multiple CSV files and then concatenates them vertically using `vcat` into a single `DataFrame` with the `reduce` function:

```julia
files = filter(endswith(".csv"), readdir())
df = reduce(vcat, CSV.read(file, DataFrame) for file in files)
```

One additional trait is that `reduce` will not parallelize because it needs to keep the order of `vcat` which follows the same ordering of the `files` vector.

With this functionality in `CSV.jl` we simply pass the `files` vector into the `CSV.read` function:

```julia
files = filter(endswith(".csv"), readdir())
df = CSV.read(files, DataFrame)
```

`CSV.jl` will designate a file for each thread available in the computer while it lazily concatenates each thread-parsed output into a `DataFrame`.
So we have the **additional benefit of multithreading** that we don't have with the `reduce` option.

### CategoricalArrays.jl compression {#sec:df_performance_categorical_compression}

If you are handling data with a lot of categorical values, i.e. a lot of columns with textual data that represent somehow different qualitative data, you would probably benefit by using `CategoricalArrays.jl` compression.

By default, **`CategoricalArrays.jl` will use an unsigned integer of size 32 bits `UInt32` to represent the underlying categories**:

```jl
s = """
    typeof(categorical(["A", "B", "C"]))
    """
sco(s; process=string, post=plainblock)
```

This means that `CategoricalArrays.jl` can represent up to $2^{32}$ different categories in a given vector or column, which is a huge value (close to 4.3 billion).
You probably would never need to have this sort of capacity in dealing with regular data[^bigdata].
That's why `categorical` has a `compress` argument that accepts either `true` or `false` to determine whether or not the underlying categorical data is compressed.
If you pass **`compress=true`, `CategoricalArrays.jl` will try to compress the underlying categorical data to the smallest possible representation in `UInt`**.
For example, the previous `categorical` vector would be represented as an unsigned integer of size 8 bits `UInt8` (mostly because this is the smallest unsigned integer available in Julia):

[^bigdata]: also notice that regular data (up to 10 000 rows) is not big data (more than 100 000 rows). So, if you are dealing primarily with big data please exercise caution in capping your categorical values.

```jl
s = """
    typeof(categorical(["A", "B", "C"]; compress=true))
    """
sco(s; process=string, post=plainblock)
```

What does this all mean?
Suppose you have a big vector.
For example, a vector with one million entries, but only 4 underlying categories: A, B, C, or D.
If you do not compress the resulting categorical vector, you will have one million entries stored as `UInt32`.
On the other hand, if you do compress it, you will have one million entries stored instead as `UInt8`.
By using `Base.summarysize` function we can get the underlying size, in bytes, of a given object.
So let's quantify how much more memory we would need to have if we did not compress our one million categorical vector:

```julia
using Random
```

```jl
s = """
    one_mi_vec = rand(["A", "B", "C", "D"], 1_000_000)
    Base.summarysize(categorical(one_mi_vec))
    """
sco(s; process=string, post=plainblock)
```

4 million bytes, which is approximately 3.8 MB.
Don't get us wrong, this is a good improvement over the raw string size:

```jl
s = """
    Base.summarysize(one_mi_vec)
    """
sco(s; process=string, post=plainblock)
```

We reduced 50% of the raw data size by using the default `CategoricalArrays.jl` underlying representation as `UInt32`.

Now let's see how we would fare with compression:

```jl
s = """
    Base.summarysize(categorical(one_mi_vec; compress=true))
    """
sco(s; process=string, post=plainblock)
```

We reduced the size to 25% (one quarter) of the original uncompressed vector size without losing information.
Our compressed categorical vector now has 1 million bytes which is approximately 1.0 MB.

So whenever possible, in the interest of performance, consider using `compress=true` in your categorical data.

Commit message:

Added leftjoin! to performance section (#152)
* Added leftjoin! according to @bkamins suggestions

* Update contents/dataframes_performance.md

Co-authored-by: Rik Huijzer <rikhuijzer@pm.me>

* Update contents/dataframes_performance.md

Co-authored-by: Bogumił Kamiński <bkamins@sgh.waw.pl>

Co-authored-by: Rik Huijzer <rikhuijzer@pm.me>
Co-authored-by: Bogumił Kamiński <bkamins@sgh.waw.pl>

contents/dataframes_performance.md, after:

## Performance {#sec:df_performance}

So far, we haven't thought about making our `DataFrames.jl` code **fast**.
Like everything in Julia, `DataFrames.jl` can be really fast.
In this section, we will give some performance tips and tricks.

### In-place operations {#sec:df_performance_inplace}

Like we explained in @sec:function_bang, functions that end with a bang `!` are a common pattern to denote functions that modify one or more of their arguments.
In the context of high performance Julia code, this *means* that **functions with `!` will just change in-place the objects that we have supplied as arguments.

Almost all the `DataFrames.jl` functions that we've seen have a \"`!` twin\".
For example, `filter` has an _in-place_ `filter!`, `select` has `select!`, `subset` has `subset!`, and so on.
Notice that these functions **do not** return a new `DataFrame`, but instead they **update** the `DataFrame` that they act upon.
Additionally, `DataFrames.jl` (version 1.3 onwards) supports in-place `leftjoin` with the function `leftjoin!`.
This function updates the left `DataFrame` with the joined columns from the right `DataFrame`.
There is a caveat that for each row of left table there must match *at most* one row in right table.

If you want the highest speed and performance in your code, you should definitely use the `!` functions instead of regular `DataFrames.jl` functions.

Let's go back to the example of the `select` function in the beginning of @sec:select.
Here is the responses `DataFrame`:

```jl
sco("responses()"; process=without_caption_label)
```

Now, let's perform the selection with the `select` function, like we did before:

```jl
s = """
    # allocating function # hide
    select(responses(), :id, :q1)
    """
sco(s, process=without_caption_label)
```

And here is the _in-place_ function:

```jl
s = """
    # non allocarting function # hide
    select!(responses(), :id, :q1)
    """
sco(s; process=without_caption_label)
```

The `@allocated` macro tells us how much memory was allocated.
In other words, **how much new information the computer had to store in its memory while running the code**.
Let's see how they will perform:

```jl
s = """
    # allocation # hide
    df = responses()
    @allocated select(df, :id, :q1)
    """
sco(s; process=string, post=plainblock)
```

```jl
s = """
    # non allocation # hide
    df = responses()
    @allocated select!(df, :id, :q1)
    """
sco(s; process=string, post=plainblock)
```

As we can see, `select!` allocates less than `select`.
So, it should be faster, while consuming less memory.

### Copying vs Not Copying Columns {#sec:df_performance_df_copy}

There are **two ways to access a DataFrame column**.
They differ in how they are accessed: one creates a "view" to the column without copying and the other creates a whole new column by copying the original column.

The first way uses the regular dot `.` operator followed by the column name, like in `df.col`.
This kind of access **does not copy** the column `col`.
Instead `df.col` creates a "view" which is a link to the original column without performing any allocation.
Additionally, the syntax `df.col` is the same as `df[!, :col]` with the bang `!` as the row selector.

The second way to access a `DataFrame` column is the `df[:, :col]` with the colon `:` as the row selector.
This kind of access **does copy** the column `col`, so beware that it may produce unwanted allocations.

As before, let's try out these two ways to access a column in the responses `DataFrame`:

```jl
s = """
    # allocation # hide
    df = responses()
    @allocated col = df[:, :id]
    """
sco(s; process=string, post=plainblock)
```


```jl
s = """
    # non allocation # hide
    df = responses()
    @allocated col = df[!, :id]
    """
sco(s; process=string, post=plainblock)
```

When we access a column without copying it we are making zero allocations and our code should be faster.
So, if you don't need a copy, always access your `DataFrame`s columns with `df.col` or `df[!, :col]` instead of `df[:, :col]`.

### CSV.read versus CSV.File {#sec:df_performance_csv_read_file}

If you take a look at the help output for `CSV.read`, you will see that there is a convenience function identical to the function called `CSV.File` with the same keyword arguments.
Both `CSV.read` and `CSV.File` will read the contents of a CSV file, but they differ in the default behavior.
**`CSV.read`, by default, will not make copies** of the incoming data.
Instead, `CSV.read` will pass all the data to the second argument (known as the "sink").

So, something like this:

```julia
df = CSV.read("file.csv", DataFrame)
```

will pass all the incoming data from `file.csv` to the `DataFrame` sink, thus returning a `DataFrame` type that we store in the `df` variable.

For the case of **`CSV.File`, the default behavior is the opposite: it will make copies of every column contained in the CSV file**.
Also, the syntax is slightly different.
We need to wrap anything that `CSV.File` returns in a `DataFrame` constructor function:

```julia
df = DataFrame(CSV.File("file.csv"))
```

Or, with the pipe `|>` operator:

```julia
df = CSV.File("file.csv") |> DataFrame
```

Like we said, `CSV.File` will make copies of each column in the underlying CSV file.
Ultimately, if you want the most performance, you would definitely use `CSV.read` instead of `CSV.File`.
That's why we only covered `CSV.read` in @sec:csv.

### CSV.jl Multiple Files {#sec:df_performance_csv_multiple}

Now let's turn our attention to the `CSV.jl`.
Specifically, the case when we have multiple CSV files to read into a single `DataFrame`.
Since version 0.9 of `CSV.jl` we can provide a vector of strings representing filenames.
Before, we needed to perform some sort of multiple file reading and then concatenate vertically the results into a single `DataFrame`.
To exemplify, the code below reads from multiple CSV files and then concatenates them vertically using `vcat` into a single `DataFrame` with the `reduce` function:

```julia
files = filter(endswith(".csv"), readdir())
df = reduce(vcat, CSV.read(file, DataFrame) for file in files)
```

One additional trait is that `reduce` will not parallelize because it needs to keep the order of `vcat` which follows the same ordering of the `files` vector.

With this functionality in `CSV.jl` we simply pass the `files` vector into the `CSV.read` function:

```julia
files = filter(endswith(".csv"), readdir())
df = CSV.read(files, DataFrame)
```

`CSV.jl` will designate a file for each thread available in the computer while it lazily concatenates each thread-parsed output into a `DataFrame`.
So we have the **additional benefit of multithreading** that we don't have with the `reduce` option.

### CategoricalArrays.jl compression {#sec:df_performance_categorical_compression}

If you are handling data with a lot of categorical values, i.e. a lot of columns with textual data that represent somehow different qualitative data, you would probably benefit by using `CategoricalArrays.jl` compression.

By default, **`CategoricalArrays.jl` will use an unsigned integer of size 32 bits `UInt32` to represent the underlying categories**:

```jl
s = """
    typeof(categorical(["A", "B", "C"]))
    """
sco(s; process=string, post=plainblock)
```

This means that `CategoricalArrays.jl` can represent up to $2^{32}$ different categories in a given vector or column, which is a huge value (close to 4.3 billion).
You probably would never need to have this sort of capacity in dealing with regular data[^bigdata].
That's why `categorical` has a `compress` argument that accepts either `true` or `false` to determine whether or not the underlying categorical data is compressed.
If you pass **`compress=true`, `CategoricalArrays.jl` will try to compress the underlying categorical data to the smallest possible representation in `UInt`**.
For example, the previous `categorical` vector would be represented as an unsigned integer of size 8 bits `UInt8` (mostly because this is the smallest unsigned integer available in Julia):

[^bigdata]: also notice that regular data (up to 10 000 rows) is not big data (more than 100 000 rows). So, if you are dealing primarily with big data please exercise caution in capping your categorical values.

```jl
s = """
    typeof(categorical(["A", "B", "C"]; compress=true))
    """
sco(s; process=string, post=plainblock)
```

What does this all mean?
Suppose you have a big vector.
For example, a vector with one million entries, but only 4 underlying categories: A, B, C, or D.
If you do not compress the resulting categorical vector, you will have one million entries stored as `UInt32`.
On the other hand, if you do compress it, you will have one million entries stored instead as `UInt8`.
By using `Base.summarysize` function we can get the underlying size, in bytes, of a given object.
So let's quantify how much more memory we would need to have if we did not compress our one million categorical vector:

```julia
using Random
```

```jl
s = """
    one_mi_vec = rand(["A", "B", "C", "D"], 1_000_000)
    Base.summarysize(categorical(one_mi_vec))
    """
sco(s; process=string, post=plainblock)
```

4 million bytes, which is approximately 3.8 MB.
Don't get us wrong, this is a good improvement over the raw string size:

```jl
s = """
    Base.summarysize(one_mi_vec)
    """
sco(s; process=string, post=plainblock)
```

We reduced 50% of the raw data size by using the default `CategoricalArrays.jl` underlying representation as `UInt32`.

Now let's see how we would fare with compression:

```jl
s = """
    Base.summarysize(categorical(one_mi_vec; compress=true))
    """
sco(s; process=string, post=plainblock)
```

We reduced the size to 25% (one quarter) of the original uncompressed vector size without losing information.
Our compressed categorical vector now has 1 million bytes which is approximately 1.0 MB.

So whenever possible, in the interest of performance, consider using `compress=true` in your categorical data.
