contents/index.md, before:

# Welcome {-}

```{=comment}
This file is only included on the website.
```

Welcome! This is an open source and open access book on how to do **Data Science using [Julia](https://julialang.org)**.
Our target audience are researchers from all fields of applied sciences.
Of course, we hope to be useful for industry too.
You can navigate through the pages of the ebook by using the arrow keys (left/right) on your keyboard.

```{=html}
<script defer type="text/javascript"
    src="https://api.pirsch.io/pirsch-events.js" id="pirscheventsjs"
    data-code="eB2Isj56H4g6ndupKwaKyHau7lCkTsVV">
</script>
```
The book is also available as [**PDF**](/juliadatascience.pdf){target="_blank" onclick="pirsch('Link Clicked')"}.

The source code is available at [GitHub](https://github.com/JuliaDataScience/JuliaDataScience){onclick="pirsch('Link Clicked')"}.

The book is published at [Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/dp/B09KMRKQ96/){onclick="pirsch('Link Clicked')"},
[Amazon.de](https://www.amazon.de/dp/B09KMRKQ96){onclick="pirsch('Link Clicked')"},
[Amazon.co.uk](https://www.amazon.co.uk/dp/B09KMRKQ96){onclick="pirsch('Link Clicked')"}
and many more Amazon stores.

If you want to be notified about updates, please consider **signing up for updates**:

```{=html}
<form style="margin: 0 auto;" action="https://api.staticforms.xyz/submit" method="post">
    <input type="hidden" name="accessKey" value="2b78f325-fb4e-44e1-ad2f-4dc714ac402f">
    <input type="email" name="email">
    <input type="hidden" name="redirectTo" value="https://juliadatascience.io/thanks">
    <input type="submit" value="Submit" />
</form>
```

### Citation Info {-}

To cite the content, please use:

```plaintext
Storopoli, Huijzer and Alonso (2021). Julia Data Science. https://juliadatascience.io. ISBN: 9798489859165.
```

Or in BibTeX format:

```plaintext
@book{storopolihuijzeralonso2021juliadatascience,
  title = {Julia Data Science},
  author = {Jose Storopoli and Rik Huijzer and Lazaro Alonso},
  url = {https://juliadatascience.io},
  year = {2021},
  isbn = {9798489859165}
}
```

### Front Cover {-}

```jl
let
    fig = front_cover()
    # Use lazy loading to keep homepage speed high.
    link_attributes = """loading="lazy" width=80%"""
    # When changing this name, also change the link in README.md.
    # This doesn't work for some reason; I need to fix it.
    filename = "frontcover"
    Options(fig; filename, label=filename)
end
```

Commit message:

Avoid having all click events look the same

contents/index.md, after:

# Welcome {-}

```{=comment}
This file is only included on the website.
```

Welcome! This is an open source and open access book on how to do **Data Science using [Julia](https://julialang.org)**.
Our target audience are researchers from all fields of applied sciences.
Of course, we hope to be useful for industry too.
You can navigate through the pages of the ebook by using the arrow keys (left/right) on your keyboard.

```{=html}
<script defer type="text/javascript"
    src="https://api.pirsch.io/pirsch-events.js" id="pirscheventsjs"
    data-code="eB2Isj56H4g6ndupKwaKyHau7lCkTsVV">
</script>
```
The book is also available as [**PDF**](/juliadatascience.pdf){target="_blank" onclick="pirsch('Click on PDF link')"}.

The source code is available at [GitHub](https://github.com/JuliaDataScience/JuliaDataScience){onclick="pirsch('Click on GitHub link')"}.

The book is published at [Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/dp/B09KMRKQ96/){onclick="pirsch('Click on Amazon.com link')"},
[Amazon.de](https://www.amazon.de/dp/B09KMRKQ96){onclick="pirsch('Click on Amazon.de link')"},
[Amazon.co.uk](https://www.amazon.co.uk/dp/B09KMRKQ96){onclick="pirsch('Click on Amazon.co.uk link')"}
and many more Amazon stores.

If you want to be notified about updates, please consider **signing up for updates**:

```{=html}
<form style="margin: 0 auto;" action="https://api.staticforms.xyz/submit" method="post">
    <input type="hidden" name="accessKey" value="2b78f325-fb4e-44e1-ad2f-4dc714ac402f">
    <input type="email" name="email">
    <input type="hidden" name="redirectTo" value="https://juliadatascience.io/thanks">
    <input type="submit" value="Submit" />
</form>
```

### Citation Info {-}

To cite the content, please use:

```plaintext
Storopoli, Huijzer and Alonso (2021). Julia Data Science. https://juliadatascience.io. ISBN: 9798489859165.
```

Or in BibTeX format:

```plaintext
@book{storopolihuijzeralonso2021juliadatascience,
  title = {Julia Data Science},
  author = {Jose Storopoli and Rik Huijzer and Lazaro Alonso},
  url = {https://juliadatascience.io},
  year = {2021},
  isbn = {9798489859165}
}
```

### Front Cover {-}

```jl
let
    fig = front_cover()
    # Use lazy loading to keep homepage speed high.
    link_attributes = """loading="lazy" width=80%"""
    # When changing this name, also change the link in README.md.
    # This doesn't work for some reason; I need to fix it.
    filename = "frontcover"
    Options(fig; filename, label=filename)
end
```
